# Sources

This document describes the source API, which allows users to register /
deregister sources and get registered sources.

All methods are available on the main `null-ls` module unless specified
otherwise. Methods not mentioned here are either internal or unstable, so use
them at your own risk.

```lua
require("null-ls").get_sources()
```

## get_sources()

Returns a list (array-like table) of all registered sources. The returned table
references the same table that null-ls uses internally, so mutating sources will
affect how null-ls operates accordingly.

Registered sources have the following structure, which differs from their
pre-registration structure:

```lua
local example_source = {
    name = "example_source",
    filetypes = { ["lua"] = true },
    methods = { [require("null-ls").methods.FORMATTING] = true },
    generator = {
        fn = function()
            return "I am a source!"
        end,
    },
    id = 1,
}
```

### name

The name of the source. Sources without a name are automatically assigned the
name `anonymous source`. Users or integrations may register any number of
sources with the same name.

### filetypes

A table of filetypes, where each key represents a filetype and each value
indicates whether the source supports that filetype. Transformed from the
original `filetypes` and `disabled_filetype` lists.

The special key `_all` indicates that a source is active for all filetypes
(unless superseded by a `false` value for a filetype key).

### methods

A table of methods, where each key represents a supported method. Transformed
from the original method or list of methods.

### generator

The source's generator.

### id

The source's ID. Assigned automatically. Each source receives the next available
ID.

## High-level methods

Users can use these methods to register new sources, get information about
registered sources, and dynamically alter how they run.

### get_source(query)

Returns a list of all registered sources matching `query`. `query` can be a
string, in which case it's treated as a name, or an object with the following
structure:

```lua
local query = {
    name = "my-source", -- string
    method = require("null-ls").methods.FORMATTING, -- null-ls method
    id = 1, -- number
}
```

All keys in the query are optional, and passing an empty query will get all
sources.

Note that special characters are automatically escaped when `query` is a string
but not when it's an object, which allows using Lua string matchers.

### is_registered(query)

Returns `true` if null-ls has registered a source matching `query`

### register(to_register)

The main method for registering sources. `to_register` can have the following
structures:

- A single source (registered individually):

```lua
require("null-ls").register(my_source)
```

- A list (array-like table) of sources (registered sequentially):

```lua
require("null-ls").register({ my_source, my_other_source })
```

- A table of sources with shared configuration (`name` and `filetypes` override
  source-specific options):

```lua
require("null-ls").register({
    name = "my_sources",
    filetypes = { "lua" },
    sources = { my_source, my_other_source },
})
```

For information on sources, see [MAIN](MAIN.md).

### disable(query)

Disables all sources matching `query`, preventing them from running under any
conditions. See `get_source(query)` above for information about the structure of
`query`.

`disable(query)` will also

### enable(query)

Enables all disabled sources matching `query`, allowing them to run again as
normal.

This will also prompt null-ls to attempt to re-attach to existing buffers and
regenerate diagnostics.

### toggle(query)

Enables or disables each source based on its current availability. See
`enable(query)` / `disable(query)` above for the consequences of source
avaiability.

## Low-level methods

These methods provide finer control over sources for integrations and advanced
use cases. Users should prefer to use the high-level methods described above.

### deregister(query)

Removes all sources matching `query` from the internal list of sources. Does not
remove diagnostics.

### reset_sources()

Removes all registered sources. Does not remove diagnostics.

### register_name(name)

Allows integrations to register a name (independent of its sources), which they
can check with `is_registered(name)` to avoid repeated registration.
